A statewide coalition of law enforcement officials, formed last fall to respond 
to what they see as the proliferation of military-type semiautomatic firearms 
among street gangs and drug dealers, has nearly completed the task of drafting 
legislation to outlaw the manufacture and sale of such guns. 


As they prepare for a showdown in the Legislature with the powerful gun lobby, 
the coalition -- whose leaders include Atty. Gen. John K. Van de Kamp, Los 
Angeles County Sheriff Sherman Block and Alameda County Dist. Atty. John J. 
Meehan -- has made passage of the bill its top priority of the year. 


"If law enforcement doesn't attempt to do something about it now, we are just 
going to have a whole higher level of arms race in California, and it is going 
to be extremely dangerous for innocent people," said Richard Inglehart, an 
Alameda County prosecutor and member of the task force drafting the 
legislation. 


The legislation is aimed at semiautomatic rifles like the Uzi, AK-47 and AR-15, 
available over the counter to anyone 18 or older who provides identification 
and fills out a form declaring that he is not a drug addict, a fugitive or a 
mentally unstable person. By contrast, purchasers of handguns must wait 15 days 
for a state background investigation before taking possession of their 
firearms. 


A bruising fight with the politically powerful National Rifle Assn. and the Gun 
Owners of California seems assured. Traditionally, the Legislature has been 
reluctant to enact anything that smacks of controls on guns or firearm 
ownership. Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. once observed that in California, 
"you don't mess with a man's guns or cars." 


"It will be one of the donnybrooks of the legislative session," predicted Gary 
Mullen, executive director of the California District Attorneys Assn., of the 
campaign that will pit the NRA against the police. 


Lobbyist David Marshall of the NRA, a veteran of previous unsuccessful attempts 
to outlaw military-type semiautomatics, maintains that a prohibition against 
such firearms will not deter criminals intent on getting them but will work to 
the disadvantage of law-abiding Californians. 


"Leave the law-abiding citizen alone," he said. "Go after the criminals and 
nail them to the wall and stop treating them with kid gloves. Get them off the 
streets. Give them mandatory jail time. No plea-bargaining. No probation. No 
parole." 




Popular Military Type 


Increasingly, the weapon of choice for drug dealers and street gangs is the 
military-style semiautomatic gun that often is easily concealed and can be 
converted to a full automatic. At semiautomatic, the rifle fires one bullet at 
a time as fast as the trigger is pulled. On automatic, one squeeze sends out a 
stream of fire like a machine gun's. 


Under a law sponsored by the NRA, it is illegal in California to convert a 
semiautomatic to a full automatic. Likewise, it is illegal to possess a machine 
gun without a permit from the attorney general. 


The drafters of the proposed law enforcement gun bill say they are close to 
agreement on language in the bill that would outlaw the manufacture and sale of 
certain "bad guns" but exempt "good guns" -- those used by hunters, competitive 
target shooters and collectors. 


The difficulty is in distinguishing between semiautomatic military weapons and 
the semiautomatic rifles and shotguns used by sportsmen, because all operate on 
basically the same principle. 




Broad Definition 


The bill would establish a broad generic definition that would fit military 
assault-type semiautomatics and be based on such things as the length of barrel 
and size of the bullet magazine. Some existing weapons would actually be banned 
by name. However, certain sporting guns that may resemble the prohibited 
firearms would be exempted by name. 


The legislation would allow manufacturers of the military-style weapons to 
obtain a permit to sell the guns that is similar to what is required for 
machine guns. In general, however, they would not be allowed to sell to 
civilian outlets in California. 


A commission would be created to approve or reject new guns that come on the 
market in the future. The commission, as yet of unspecified membership, could 
add prohibited guns to the list, which sponsors said would be short, at least 
initially. 


The bill, which has undergone at least 10 drafts, is expected to be introduced 
next month. No legislator has yet been asked to carry the measure, proponents 
said, although Senate President Pro Tem David A. Roberti (D-Los Angeles) has 
promised to author such a bill. 


Strategists for the task force conceded that assuring hunters, collectors and 
sportsmen that their guns are "safe" and would not be affected by the bill is a 
key element in winning its approval by a Legislature highly sensitive to 
gun-owning constituents. 


"We want to make sure the bill doesn't affect hunters and sportsmen, even 
though the NRA will take it on and be opposed to it," said prosecutor 
Inglehart. "But there are some guns that are not designed or meant to be used 
for hunting." 


Sheriff Block, an outspoken opponent of semiautomatic assault weapons, said he 
believes there is a need to "selectively regulate and, if necessary, prohibit 
certain kinds of weaponry in the interests of public safety. These weapons are 
legally available. People have exercised what is a right under the law (to 
purchase them) and I think the law has to be changed." 




Retired Senator Active 


Joining in the fight against the legislation will be the Gun Owners of 
California, a political action committee headed by retired Sen. H. L. 
Richardson. The Glendora Republican now is in the business of producing 
conservative political videos. 


Richardson said he intends to blanket the state with thousands of videos 
opposing the legislation, just as he did when he campaigned for the defeat of 
former state Supreme Court Chief Justice Rose Elizabeth Bird. 


Gun control advocates, who were active in earlier attempts to outlaw 
military-type semiautomatic rifles, have made the tactical decision to remain 
on the sidelines in this struggle. For many gun owners and legislators, gun 
control is a code phrase for confiscating firearms. 


"We are taking our cue from law enforcement and looking to them for leadership 
on this issue," said Louis Tolley, state director of Handgun Control Inc. "We 
are very anxious to support them. They have the expertise in defining these 
assault weapons and how best to restrict them. We don't have that expertise." 