IT has plenty of ice and penguins and krill, and the only thing endangered is
the ozone above it. So who cares if Arco or Shell sinks a few oil wells in
Antarctica? At least no NIMBYs would complain about derricks spoiling the
view.;    But oil exploration and mining would ruin Antarctica. Development
potentially would disrupt scientific research there, and put at unacceptable
risk an unparalleled ecosystem. 
At a just-concluded session in Madrid, Spain, 39 nations reached a
tentative compromise on updating the Antarctica Treaty.;    Washington,
dragging its feet all the way, needs steady pressure to accept the compromise.
While other nations -- including Japan, Germany and New Zealand -- pushed for
a permanent ban on commercial exploitation, U.S. and British delegates held
out for a short moratorium.;    Public pressure at home likely nudged the
holdouts to accept a 50-year moratorium on mining and mineral exploration. The
draft specifies that, when the moratorium expires, it may be lifted only with
approval of two-thirds of the signatories.;    Next month, the original
Antarctica Treaty will celebrate its 30th anniversary. What better way to
honor a model international agreement than to continue its tradition of
preserving Antarctica for scientific research, and keeping it off-limits to
military bases, commercial development and mining.;    Antarctica is as
pristine as environments come these days. With a climate harsher than the
Arctic's, it has less capacity for absorbing intervention and abuse.;    The
Earth endows us with a wealth worth vastly more than the artificial commodity
value of its resources. It may turn out that preserving Antarctica will reap
humankind more benefits than the yield from digging up and selling off all its
gold, silver and oil.